ARTICLE 6 ACADEMIC FREEDOM
6.1       The common good of society depends upon each individual’s freedom of expression, and academic freedom in higher education is an essential aspect of that common good. The history of intellectual growth and discovery clearly demonstrates the value of academic freedom. Brescia University College is committed to the pursuit of truth, the advancement of learning and the dissemination of knowledge.
6.2       All members of the Brescia University College faculty are entitled to the exercise of academic freedom. Academic freedom includes the right to carry out research and publish the results, and to teach, write, propose and discuss, without deference to prescribed doctrine. It also includes the right to criticize anything, including the Brescia Faculty Association and Brescia University College, and to cooperate with colleagues in academic matters without interference. Academic freedom does not require neutrality on the part of faculty members.
6.3       Academic freedom includes the right to make statements or publish research, which may discomfit those who provide research or educational resources.
6.4       Obligations of faculty members include the responsibility to respect the rights and freedoms of others and preservation of the confidentiality necessary in personal, academic and administrative deliberations. Faculty must respect the right of other members of the academic community – faculty, staff and students – to express their opinions.
6.5       In the classroom, there are freedoms and responsibilities. The credibility of the principles of Academic Freedom depends upon a collective commitment to exercise those freedoms in a manner consistent with the scholarly obligation to base research and teaching on an honest and ethical search for knowledge, intellectual rigour, and sound academic procedure. As professors, faculty members are required to teach what is in accordance with the truth, as they see it. In this capacity, it is the duty of faculty members, in each course they teach, not to endorse views which they know to be false. Faculty members have the responsibility to conduct class discussions in an open manner that invites critical thinking. Acknowledging these principles, Brescia University College recognizes the great benefits to be extracted from the free transmission and exchange of ideas, and from the collaborative testing and challenging of views, however controversial. Consequently, Brescia University College will not threaten faculty members with sanctions, or impose sanctions upon them after the fact, for academic discussions conducted in accordance with this policy within the classroom or the content of the material that figures in the courses they teach.
6.6       When engaged in teaching, research or scholarship, or when engaging in public discourse, Brescia faculty have a responsibility to reflect upon Brescia University College’s values, its Catholic identity and their own ethical principles. Faculty members are also expected to act in accordance with the law, including, but not limited to, the Ontario Human Rights Code and the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. Notwithstanding this principle, it is understood that non-violent civil disobedience can in some instances be consistent with academic freedom. In cases where convictions are brought against faculty members, Brescia University College will not impose sanctions upon faculty members unless those convictions bear directly on their fitness for continuing employment as scholars and teachers.
6.7       It is expected that the Administration of Brescia University College and the Brescia Faculty Association will promote, cherish and protect academic freedom, particularly in situations where there may be external pressures to silence an individual or a group.
6.8       All faculty members have the right to fulfil their functions without discrimination of any kind and without interference or repression from University administrators, politicians, or others. No member of Brescia University College’s academic community shall suffer any penalty or reprisals for the exercise of academic freedom in accordance with this policy, nor will any such penalty or reprisal be countenanced.
6.9       In their capacity as researchers and scholars, individual researchers do not represent the views of Brescia University College. Faculty shall not purport to speak on behalf of Brescia University College unless specifically authorized to do so. A statement of affiliation with, or position in Brescia University College, or of qualifications relevant thereto, shall not be construed as an attempt to speak on behalf of Brescia University College.
6.10     A faculty member who intends to publish a statement, research results, or an opinion piece that in his or her opinion might reasonably be expected to invite intense public scrutiny may wish, in order to allow for a timely response by the University, to inform the Principal in advance of the publication date, if doing so is practicable and reasonable. Such a provision of information would be entirely voluntary and by no means required or expected. In the event of receiving such information, neither the Principal nor Brescia University College will attempt in any way to dissuade the faculty member from releasing his or her statement, nor shall the release of this material be hindered by Brescia in any way, either overtly or subtly. In the event of faculty statements causing intense public scrutiny where no such advance notice was provided to the Principal, the faculty member shall be subject to no sanction or censure because of the lack of notice.
6.11     The Administration of Brescia University College, each member of Faculty and the Brescia Faculty Association agree to uphold and protect these principles of academic freedom.
