ARTICLE 3.10                 ACADEMIC FREEDOM

3.10.1    In addition to their legal rights as citizens, Members have the right to academic freedom. Academic freedom is the right to search for truth, knowledge and understanding and to express freely what one believes. The University as an institution and the community of its scholars have a duty to protect and defend the search for knowledge and truth by all that enquire, teach, offer professional library service and learn under its auspices. They shall be free to carry out research and to publish its results, free to teach, to discuss and to criticise both the University and the wider society it serves.

3.10.2    Academic freedom includes the right, without restriction by prescribed doctrine, to freedom in teaching; freedom in research and scholarship including the right to disseminate and publish the results thereof; freedom to produce and perform creative works; freedom to acquire, preserve, and provide access to documentary material in all formats; freedom to participate in professional and representative academic bodies; freedom to engage in service to the institution and the community; and freedom to express one’s opinion about the University, its administration, and the system in which one works.

Academic freedom does not confer legal immunity. It requires the acknowledgement of the work of others and the acceptance of responsibility for one's own beliefs and utterances.

3.10.3    The principle and practice of collegial governance is essential for the exercise of academic freedom within the University. Members are entitled to have representatives on and to participate in collegial governing bodies in accordance with their role in the fulfillment of the University’s academic and educational mission.

3.10.4    Academic freedom also entails the right of academic staff to exercise their civil liberties as individuals, including the right to contribute to social change through free expression on matters of public interest, without being censored, impeded or hindered by the Employer.

3.10.5    The Employer shall not abridge academic freedom on any grounds, including claims of institutional autonomy.

3.10.6    The Parties agree that Members have a right to privacy, consistent with the traditions of Academic Freedom and the provisions of this Article.
1
