Article 9 - 
Academic and Intellectual Freedom and Privacy Rights
Academic and Intellectual Freedom
9.01     The common good of society depends upon the search for knowledge and its free exposition. Academic freedom in universities is essential to both these purposes in the fulfillment of an employee’s professional responsibilities, which are specified in Clause 12.01 of this Agreement. The parties agree that they will not infringe or abridge the academic freedom of any member of the bargaining unit. Members of the bargaining unit are entitled, regardless of prescribed doctrine, to freedom in carrying out research and creative activity, and in publishing the results thereof; freedom of teaching and of discussion; freedom to criticize the university and the faculty association; and freedom from institutional censorship. Academic freedom does not require neutrality on the part of the individual. Rather, academic freedom makes commitment possible. Academic freedom carries with it the duty to use that freedom in a manner consistent with the scholarly obligation to base research and teaching on an honest search for knowledge, and with due regard for the rights of others. Freedom in teaching necessarily includes the freedom of an employee to determine pedagogy, and the use of those teaching and support materials which she/he believes to be appropriate.Privacy Rights
9.02     Employees have the custody and control of their professional materials, including but not limited to materials connected to teaching, research, creative activity, librarianship, and service.
9.03     Mail, telephone, e-mail, internet and other similar services provided to employees by the Employer are provided for the purpose of assisting employees in the performance of their professional responsibilities to the Employer.
9.04     Therefore, subject to the next sentence, employees will not use these services except in the performance of their professional responsibilities. The occasional mailing of personal letters at their own expense, use of telephone services at no expense to the Employer, receiving and sending personal e-mail messages, and use of the internet for personal reasons will not be a violation of this clause absent advance notification from the Employer that either the quantity or nature of the usage constitutes a violation. In no case will these services be used by employees for commercial reasons except in the performance of their professional responsibilities to the Employer.
9.05     The Employer recognizes that employees have the right to privacy in the contents of their personal and professional communications as they are being made using University services, and in the contents of the files employees maintain, whether these communications and files are on paper or in electronic form. The Employer reserves the right to monitor and access user accounts in order to maintain the integrity of the computer system in a secure and reasonable manner. Only authorized personnel in the performance of their employment duties may access and monitor the use of information technology and computing facilities. However, this clause in no way limits the Employer’s right to use material sent by the Employer to an employee or received by the Employer from an employee.Confidentiality of Grant Applications and Research Proposals
9.06     Copies of grant applications and research proposals sent to the Research Committee, the Research Office or the Provost and Vice-President, Academic and Research shall be confidential and will only be shared with authorized Mount Allison personnel in the performance of their employment duties. Applications or details of applications shall not be made public without the written permission of any and all faculty members who are applicants.
